---
date: 2020-08-02 12:20:52+00:00
title: Use git hooks and husky to tell your teammates when to run npm install
description: This short tutorial shows you how you can automatically check for changes to package-lock.json after git pull and echo a notification to the command line.
---

A former coworker and I had a system for letting each other know about dependency changes in shared codebases. We wrote `npm install` on a post-it note and would stick it to the other person’s monitor. Once the post-it note eventually lost its stickiness, we just screwed up and threw it at each other. By the end of the project, the universal sign for ‘update your dependencies’ was to throw a random object across the room.

The only downside of this otherwise perfect system is that it doesn’t scale well, especially on distributed teams. A much better solution is to use git hooks.

[Git hooks](https://git-scm.com/docs/githooks) execute a command when git performs an action. They are useful for doing things like running a linter before you commit (`pre-commit`) or running a build script when a server receives a push (`post-receive`).

We want to check whether `package-lock.json` has changed when we run `git pull`, so we can use the `post-merge` hook (`git pull` being equivalent to `git fetch` + `git merge`). If the lockfile has changed, we can `echo` a notification to the user that they should run `npm install` to bring their `node_modules` directory up to date.

## Create a git hook file
In your repo, create a file called `post-merge` in `.git/hooks`:

```sh
touch .git/hooks/post-merge
```

In that file we’re going to define a function that checks whether a file has changed between commits, and run that function with `package-lock.json` as the argument:

```sh
function changed {
  git diff --name-only HEAD@{1} HEAD | grep "^$1" > /dev/null 2>&1
}

if changed 'package-lock.json'; then
  echo "📦 package-lock.json changed. Run npm install to bring your dependencies up to date."
fi
```

You could add notifications for other file changes in here, like `Gemfile.lock` or `Podfile.lock`.

Credit to [8bitDesigner](https://gist.github.com/8bitDesigner/5869846) for this approach.

## Test the hook
Try out the hook by rewinding to a commit where you know `package-lock.json` has changed, let’s say 20 commits ago, then running `git pull` to fast-forward back to now:

```sh
git reset --hard HEAD~20 && git pull
```

If package-lock.json changed between now and then, you will see the notification.

## Use husky to share your hook with others
Changes in the `.git` directory are not version controlled, so we need to move our hook to somewhere that is. We then need to provide a way for other developers to easily install the hook for themselves. Thankfully [husky](https://github.com/typicode/husky) exists to do exactly that.

Create a directory called `.githooks` and move your hook there:

```sh
mkdir .githooks && mv .git/hooks/post-merge .githooks
```


Now we can set up husky. The npm post-install script for husky checks `package.json` for any declared hooks and automatically installs them in `.git/hooks`. 

In `package.json` add:

```json
"husky": {
  "hooks": {
     "post-merge": "./.githooks/post-merge"
  }
}
```

Then install husky:

```sh
npm install --save-dev husky
```

Next time someone runs `npm install` with your changes, the hook will be installed in their local `.git` directory.
